<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 23: Candide and Martin Touched Upon the Coast of England, and What They Saw There</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Candide and Martin Touched Upon the Coast of England, and What They Saw There</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“Ah, Pangloss! Pangloss! Ah, Martin! Martin! Ah, my dear Cunégonde, what sort of a world is this?” said Candide on board the Dutch ship.</p>
			<p>“Something very foolish and abominable,” said Martin.</p>
			<p>“You know England? Are they as foolish there as in France?”</p>
			<p>“It is another kind of folly,” said Martin. “You know that these two nations are at war for a few acres of snow in Canada,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a> and that they spend over this beautiful war much more than Canada is worth. To tell you exactly, whether there are more people fit to send to a madhouse in one country than the other, is what my imperfect intelligence will not permit. I only know in general that the people we are going to see are very atrabilious.”</p>
			<p>Talking thus they arrived at Portsmouth. The coast was lined with crowds of people, whose eyes were fixed on a fine man kneeling, with his eyes bandaged, on board one of the men of war in the harbour. Four soldiers stood opposite to this man; each of them fired three balls at his head, with all the calmness in the world; and the whole assembly went away very well satisfied.</p>
			<p>“What is all this?” said Candide; “and what demon is it that exercises his empire in this country?”</p>
			<p>He then asked who was that fine man who had been killed with so much ceremony. They answered, he was an Admiral.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a></p>
			<p>“And why kill this Admiral?”</p>
			<p>“It is because he did not kill a sufficient number of men himself. He gave battle to a French Admiral; and it has been proved that he was not near enough to him.”</p>
			<p>“But,” replied Candide, “the French Admiral was as far from the English Admiral.”</p>
			<p>“There is no doubt of it; but in this country it is found good, from time to time, to kill one Admiral to encourage the others.”</p>
			<p>Candide was so shocked and bewildered by what he saw and heard, that he would not set foot on shore, and he made a bargain with the Dutch skipper (were he even to rob him like the Surinam captain) to conduct him without delay to Venice.</p>
			<p>The skipper was ready in two days. They coasted France; they passed in sight of Lisbon, and Candide trembled. They passed through the Straits, and entered the Mediterranean. At last they landed at Venice.</p>
			<p>“God be praised!” said Candide, embracing Martin. “It is here that I shall see again my beautiful Cunégonde. I trust Cacambo as myself. All is well, all will be well, all goes as well as possible.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
